##HapiGenie

HapiGenie is an application built with the consumers of the EPA’s data in mind. Much of the publicly-available EPA data is consumed by academic, public interest and research organizations. These organizations pull the data to create tools, apps and new combined datasets.  The EPA’s fundamental mission of promoting sustainability, influencing consumer behavior and developing effective regulatory programs is enabled when these data consumers can easily produce a diverse, accurate and flexible set of applications.
As we reviewed the data and formats available, we noticed that the majority of the downloadable data were in unfiltered csv or xml format, which are both older and less versatile data interchange formats than the modern JSON format. We saw that in order to facilitate application development with these EPA datasets, the data needed to be in a lighter, more adaptable format. Rather than skip over this step, we decided we would focus on building a robust API layer to present any EPA data to external developers. Agile projects using open source tools most commonly expect data in RESTful APIs using JSON formats. Converting datasets from csv to JSON is a great first step to help developers create applications from this data. We made a scalable version of this idea with H-api-Gen – a JSON API generator for the Facilities Registry System’s dataset. Our mission became to provide a more valuable ROI for EPA than simply picking a dataset to display with fancy graphics libraries. 

True to our corporate culture, we came up with a modular design that demonstrates SalientCRGT’s commitment to creating and maintaining outstanding and innovative software applications by thinking outside the box to solve real world problems for our clients. Salient CRGT has a long history of creating comprehensive software solutions for the EPA, and we understand that flash is not the most needed outcome, but technical excellence, practical delivery that works across organizational silos and stepwise approaches are of greatest value.

While the current version of this application is limited in scope to the FRS dataset and its csv files, we designed it to easily scale to incorporate multiple datasets and additional file formats. We envision that this tool can grow through the addition of complex search strings and other functions to create a rich environment for developers inside or outside the EPA to create novel, data-driven tools addressing key issues such as Greenhouse Gas Reduction reporting, goal-setting and tracking, and consumer oriented mobile apps that affect purchasing behaviors.

In order to accomplish this task, our dedicated team of developers worked in a centralized agile war room in the afternoons and met for twice daily standups. We utilized Slack for group messaging, and the Waffle.io board in combination with Github to track stories and bugs. Cloud9 was our development environment, and our application is hosted in the AWS cloud.

HapiGenie is an application that makes our development wishes come to life, and we hope it will do the same for you!
